Add draft Prometheus 3.0 announcement blog post (#2545)
prometheus/docs: content/blog/content/blog/2024-11-14-prometheus-3-0.md

---
title: Announcing Prometheus 3.0
created_at: 2024-11-24
kind: article
author_name: The Prometheus Team
draft: true
---

Following the recent release of [Prometheus 3.0 beta](https://prometheus.io/blog/2024/09/11/prometheus-3-beta/) at PromCon in Berlin, the Prometheus Team
is excited to announce the release of Prometheus Version 3.0! This latest version marks a major milestone, as it is the first major release in 7 years. 
Prometheus has come a long way in that time, evolving from an obscure project for data nerds into a standard part of cloud-native deployment stack.

Since the beta release, a few additional breaking changes have been added.

# What's New

Here is a summary of the exciting changes that have been released as part of the beta version, as well as what has been added since:

## New UI

One of the highlights in Prometheus 3.0 is its brand-new UI that is enabled by default:

> ![New UI query page](/static/blog/2024-09-24/blog_post_screenshot_tree_view-s.png)

Reviewer: some broken images

Learn more about the new UI in general in [Julius' detailed article on the PromLabs blog](https://promlabs.com/blog/2024/09/11/a-look-at-the-new-prometheus-3-0-ui/).
Users can temporarily enable the old UI by using the `old-ui` feature flag.

Since the new UI is not battle-tested yet, it is also very possible that there are still bugs. If you find any, please 
[report them on GitHub](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&projects=&template=bug_report.yml).

Since the beta, the user interface has been updated to support UTF-8 metric and label names.

![New UTF-8 UI](/static/blog/2024-09-24/utf8_ui.png)

## Remote Write 2.0

Remote-Write 2.0 iterates on the previous protocol version by adding native support for a host of new elements including metadata, exemplars,
created timestamp and native histograms. It also uses string interning to reduce payload size and CPU usage when compressing and decompressing. 
There is better handling for partial writes to provide more details to clients when this occurs. More details can be found 

> [here](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec_2_0/.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[here](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec_2_0/).
```

## UTF-8 Support

Prometheus now allows all valid UTF-8 characters to be used in metric and label names by default, as well as label values,
as has been true in version 2.x.

Users will need to make sure their metrics producers are configured to pass UTF-8 names, and if either side does not support UTF-8,
metric names will be escaped using the traditional underscore-replacement method. PromQL queries can be written with the new quoting syntax
in order to retrieve UTF-8 metrics, or users can specify the __name__  label name manually.

> Not all language clients have yet been updated with support for UTF-8 but the primary Go libraries have been. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently only the Go client library has been updated to support UTF-8, but support for other languages will be added soon. 
```

* 2.0.0 (7 years ago)
* 2.18.0 (4 years ago)
* 3.0.0 (now)

![Memory bytes](/static/blog/2024-09-24/memory_bytes_ui.png)

![CPU seconds](/static/blog/2024-09-24/cpu_seconds.png)

It’s furthermore impressive that those numbers were taken using our [prombench macrobenchmark](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/pull/15366) 
that uses the same PromQL queries, configuration and environment–highlighting backward compatibility and stability for the core features, even with 3.0.

# What's Next

There are still tons of exciting features and improvements we can make in Prometheus and the ecosystem. Here is a non-exhaustive list to get you excited and… 
hopefully motivate you to contribute and join us!

* New, more inclusive **governance**
* More **OpenTelemetry** compatibility and features
* OpenMetrics 2.0, now under Prometheus governance!
* Native Histograms stability (and with custom buckets!)
* More optimizations!
* UTF-8 support coverage in more SDKs and tools

> # Try It Out!

Reviewer: can we put "try it out" at the top of the post? I think some percentage of people would like to download first and then read details later

Author: I tried moving the `Try It Out` section to the top after the intro, but the box that has the links for the `What's New` section now appear in the `Try It Out` section... maybe in the intro we can include a link to download it like we did in the 3.0 beta post, then leave the `Try It Out` at the bottom?
<img width="1349" alt="Screenshot 2024-11-05 at 6 10 05 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3b81462c-5465-4978-8247-023fe0ba5d93">

Author: I did try adding the `Try It Out` section to the top below the intro, but it also puts the links for `What's New` next to it...
![Screenshot 2024-11-13 at 11 50 10 AM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6d094084-e64a-497e-8c4c-888d5f4b3710)

Author: Maybe we can add a link to download it in the intro, like we did in the 3.0 Beta post, and keep the `Try It Out` section at the bottom?

Reviewer 2: I don't mind having the `Try it out` section further down. People should read the whole blog post before trying it out :) 
But I don't feel strongly about this

Reviewer: I like this order

Since the beta, the user interface has been updated to support UTF-8 metric and label names.

![New UTF-8 UI](/assets/blog/2024-11-14/utf8_ui.png)

## Remote Write 2.0

Remote-Write 2.0 iterates on the previous protocol version by adding native support for a host of new elements including metadata, exemplars,
created timestamp and native histograms. It also uses string interning to reduce payload size and CPU usage when compressing and decompressing. 
There is better handling for partial writes to provide more details to clients when this occurs. More details can be found
[here](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec_2_0/).

## UTF-8 Support

Prometheus now allows all valid UTF-8 characters to be used in metric and label names by default, as well as label values,
as has been true in version 2.x.

Users will need to make sure their metrics producers are configured to pass UTF-8 names, and if either side does not support UTF-8,
metric names will be escaped using the traditional underscore-replacement method. PromQL queries can be written with the new quoting syntax

> in order to retrieve UTF-8 metrics, or users can specify the __name__  label name manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in order to retrieve UTF-8 metrics, or users can specify the `__name__`  label name manually.
```

Reviewer: this is the only blocking change

---
title: Announcing Prometheus 3.0
created_at: 2024-11-14
kind: article
author_name: The Prometheus Team

> draft: true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
draft: false
```

I guess this is no longer a draft?

---

Following the recent release of [Prometheus 3.0 beta](https://prometheus.io/blog/2024/09/11/prometheus-3-beta/) at PromCon in Berlin, the Prometheus Team
is excited to announce the release of Prometheus Version 3.0!

This latest version marks a significant milestone, as it is the first major release in 7 years. Prometheus has come a long way in that time, 
evolving from a project for early adopters to becoming a standard part of the cloud native monitoring stack. Prometheus 3.0 aims to 
continue that journey by adding some exciting new features while largely maintaining stability and compatibility with previous versions.

The full 3.0 release adds some new features on top of the early beta and also introduces a few additional breaking changes that we will describe in this article.

# What's New

Here is a summary of the exciting changes that have been released as part of the beta version, as well as what has been added since:

## New UI

One of the highlights in Prometheus 3.0 is its brand-new UI that is enabled by default:

![New UI query page](/assets/blog/2024-11-14/blog_post_screenshot_tree_view-s.png)

> The UI has been completely rewritten with less clutter, a more modern look and feel, new features like a The UI has been completely rewritten with less clutter, 
> a more modern look and feel, new features like a [**PromLens**](https://promlens.com/)-style tree view, and will make future maintenance easier by using a more modern technical stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The UI has been completely rewritten with less clutter, a more modern look and feel, new features like a [**PromLens**](https://promlens.com/)-style tree view, and will make future maintenance easier by using a more modern technical stack.
```
